#WifeyAlpha 
The VIX, The Variance Premium and Stock Market Volatility (2014) ([link](https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1675.pdf))

"2007-2009 crisis has intensified the need for indicators of the risk aversion of market participants. It has also become increasingly commonplace to assume that changes in risk appetites are an important determinant of asset prices. Not surprisingly, the behavioural finance literature (see e.g. Baker and Wurgler, 2007) had developed sentiment indices, and financial institutions have created a wide variety of 'risk aversion' indicators (see Coudert and Gex (2008) for a survey). One simple candidate indicator is the equity variance premium, the difference between the squared VIX index and an estimate of the conditional variance of the stock market. The VIX index is the 'risk-neutral' expected stock market variance for the US S&P500 contract and is computed from a panel of options prices. Well-known as a 'fear index' (Whaley, 2000) for asset markets, it reflects both stock market uncertainty (the 'physical' expected volatility), and a variance risk premium, which is also the expected premium from selling stock market variance in a swap contract. Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) show that an estimate of this variance premium predicts stock returns; Bekaert, Hoerova, and Lo Duca (2013) show that there are interactions between monetary policy and the variance premium, suggesting that monetary policy may actually affect risk aversion in the market place. The variance premium uses objective financial market information and naturally 'cleanses' option-implied volatility from the effect of physical volatility dynamics and uncertainty, leaving a measure correlated with risk aversion. How to measure the variance premium is not without controversy however, because it relies on an estimate of the conditional variance of stock returns. We tackle several measurement issues for the variance premium, assessing a plethora of state-of-the-art volatility models and making full use of overlapping daily data, rather than sparse end-of-month data, which is standard. The conditional variance measure is of interest in its own right. First, there is a long literature on the trade-off between risk, as measured by the conditional variance of stock market returns, and the aggregate risk premium on the market (see e.g. Frenc, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987) for a seminal contribution). This long line of research has mostly failed to uncover a strong positive relationship between risk and return (see Bali, 2008, for a summary). Second, stock market volatility can also be viewed as a market-based measure of economic uncertainty. For example, Bloom (2009) shows that heightened 'economic uncertainty' decreased employment and output. Interestingly, he uses the VIX index to measure uncertainty, so that his results may actually be driven by the variance premium rather than uncertainty per se. Using more plausible estimates of the variance premium and stock market volatility, we then assess whether they predict stock returns, economic activity, as well as financial instability, an economic outcome that has garnered considerable policy interest in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis. We find that the equity variance risk premium predicts stock returns while stock market volatility mostly does not. By contrast, stock market volatility predicts industrial production growth, a measure of economic activity, while equity variance premium has no predictive power of future economic activity. Moreover, conditional variance predicts financial instability more strongly than does the variance premium, especially at longer horizons".